# Don't get screwed

The tech industry is a marvel of innovation and a career here can mean solving the worlds problems while making more
than enough money. It can also mean getting abused and hurt by a system that prioritizes profits and the status the
founders/investors over the sanity and safety of employees. Here are some things you need to know to navigate your first
(or next) job in the tech industry so that you don't leave the field entirely or waste your tears on organizations that
don't deserve them.


## Human Resources

The role of the HR department is to prevent the company from getting sued. There are people on these teams who are kind
but their incentive is to prevent you from causing harm to the rest of the company. At best this means they create and
enforce policies where you'd have no chance at a lawsuit. At worst it means they stifle your attempts to fix a
situation.


### HR and Sexual Harassment 

If you're harassed at work you may choose to report it to HR. This is, of course, entirely up to you and you may choose
to avoid reporting for any number of reasons (though we encourage you to tell someone you trust so that you can be taken
seriously and see in your friend's face that the behavior you witnessed is unacceptable). 

If you do choose to report harassment here are some of the situations you may encounter:

* The HR rep tells you that this is the offender's first offence and they won't be taking action

California state law makes the management of the company *personally* criminally liable for sexual harassment that
happens at the company. For organiztions boasting a flat org chart this means the CEO could go to jail. In a more
traditionally-structured company this means the people lead in the chain from harassee to CEO who fails to attempt to
stop the harassment is the one in trouble.

The first time someone is reported for sexual harassment they're officially put on notice by the company. At this point
the company has dealt with the complaint but they've also admitted that there is a problem so if it happens again the
company must take further action in order to be compliant.

Any company with a decent HR team will know all this and will take a report of sexual harassment very seriously - even
if it's the "first offense". But there are companies who believe it's worth the risk of a lawsuit in order to protect
valuable employees from accountability and to protect the company brand. If the answer to your report of sexual
harassment is "this is his first offense" you're at the latter type of company.

* The HR rep will tell you whether it was really harassment.

Reality: They'll always say it wasn't. Whether you choose to pursue any further action don't let yourself believe the HR
rep's evaluation of your experience. You work in tech and you're a smartypants so trust your gut.

* The HR rep will tell you they're "taking care of it"

You have a right to ask for constant updates on what the organization is doing to protect you and people like you. If
they don't immediately fire the offender then it's either because they need to do a proper investigation or because they
intend to do nothing. You have a right to know the means of their investigation, the timeline of it, and the outcome.
You also have a (legal) right to disagree with the company's conclusion.

Further reading:
[11 Common Mistakes of California Sexual Harassment Victims](https://www.avvo.com/legal-guides/ugc/11-common-mistakes-of-california-sexual-harassment-victims) by Katrina Margaret Saleen

## Promotions

It's your manager's job to communicate to you what the expectations of your job are and whether you're meeting those.
It's also their job to clearly communicate to you a path from where you are to the next step in where you want to go. 

### Levels

Most of the larger Bay Area tech companies use a standardized "leveling" chart that roughly describes the levels of
seniority a person might progress through in their career. They start at the entry level where you're purely learning
all the way up to describing the capabilities of someone who invented a programming language or leads engineering at
Google.

These levels are standardized because of a company called
[Radford](https://radford.aon.com/insights/articles/2015/radford-global-job-leveling) that asks companies to assign a
level to every current employee and submit the level information along with associated salary information (anonymized)
to Radford. Radford then issues guidelines based on the current industry pay rates about what a person at a specific
level should be paid.

This works effectively like a [trust](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trust_\(business\)) and can lead a company to tell
you they pay $160K for an employee at your level when, in fact, they have enough budget and need that they'd be fine
paying $220K.

#### Know your level

When you join a large company you'll either be assigned the default entry level or, if you've industry experience and/or
made a serious attempt to negotiate, a level that you negotiate with the person doing the hiring.

When you join a small company they probably won't have levels and their evaluation of you will be implicit and entirely
dependent on the particular biases of the person you report to. This could be beneficial if they are happy to help you
rapidly accelerate in a way customized to your particular strengths and weaknesses or could be very harmful if you don't
look and act exactly like the people your manager associates with competence.

Regardless of the leveling system at your company you should always know what it would take for you to advance. It's
your manager's job (one of the very few real tasks they have) to ensure you know what you need to do to get to the next
stage of your career.

### 

### If you can't advance

If your manager doesn't promote you it might be because they are failing at their job and either didn't give you a path
forward or gave you one that the rest of the company won't back and therefore your manager's attempt to promote you
failed. It's also possible there is no headcount at your company for someone of the next level (companies generally
refuse to have all of their employees rated at "extra most senior developer ever") or no budget for raises.

If you find yourself in this situation it's time to start interviewing at other companies (even if you've only been at
your current one a very short while). If your current company values you they'll take a look at any offer letters you
receive and try to offer more money or a different role so you feel valued and can move forward. If they refuse to make
an attempt to compete with another company that wants to hire you then they don't value you and you should quit
regardless.

Note: You may feel loyalty to your employer and this is noble but that loyalty is misplaced. Be loyal to yourself and to
those who come after you who will see your example. Tech companies, though full of well-intentioned people, are machines
that extract the time and brainpower from employees to deliver customer value to then, in turn, deliver shareholder
value and, often, increase the personal status of the founders and investors. This may sound cynical but this system
works really well for innovating in technology - just as long as you don't assume your employer cares for you. If the
people you work for care about you you'll know it in your bones and when you need to leave they'll call around to find a
great position for you and they'll help you transition.


### 
